---
layout: page
title: for reviewers
---

At *sx archipelagos* we are working to build a community of reviewers and contributors so to sustain and enrich our collective Caribbeanist scholarship. If you would like to join our team of reviewers—to help us review articles and digital projects—please contact us at archipelagos@smallaxe.net.

---

## Table of Contents
{:.no_toc}

* ToC
{:toc}

---

## Review Guidelines for Digital Projects

*sx archipelagos* accepts mid-stage digital scholarship projects beyond
the article or monograph format for single-blind review. Our review
process is crafted in accordance with the [DHCommons
model](http://dhcommons.org/journal/submission-guidelines), with some
additions and revisions. Once peer review is completed, projects are
“launched” via a dedicated page on the *sx archipelagos* platform. This
landing page features a brief description of and link to the project,
along with excerpts of audio, visual, and other multimedia elements.
This page also provides a link to (a curated version of) the dialogue
between site authors and peer reviewers. Click for an example.

Project review occurs in two phases:

1.  Authors submit a Project Statement consisting of a 350-to-500-word
    abstract and a 5000-to-7000-word description. Reviewers will offer
    initial feedback within four to six weeks.

2.  Authors respond to reviewer feedback in a 1000-to-1200-word
    narrative and provide a link to a navigable beta site for
    final review.

The Editors synthesize reviewer comments and the response from the
author for final publication on a dedicated project page.

Our review guidelines are separated into four categories: Contribution,
Credit, Design, and Preservation.

### Contribution

We ask reviewers to carefully weigh the de facto or possible
intellectual contribution of the project. Reviewers should consider the
nature of that contribution appropriate to the current stage of the
project’s development and consider early signs of process-derived
knowledge; the project’s relationship to existing literature/projects;
and/or early conversations in the literature about the project (where
appropriate).

-   Will the project frame new conversations in the relevant subject
    area?

-   Are the methods used in the project appropriate to the research
    questions it poses?

-   Do the project’s methods contribute to digital scholarship in
    general, and if so, how?

### Credit

We ask reviewers to be conscious of the labor that went into the making
of a digital project. Digital projects generally depend on more
distributed collaboration than monographs or articles. *sx archipelagos*
encourages the crediting of work where credit is due and the
acknowledgment of the scholarly and interpretative work involved in data
curation, design, and the engineering of digital projects. Reviewers
should ask the following questions of a project:

-   Does the project credit its contributors openly and fairly?

-   Are the labor conditions under which the project was produced made
    evident?

-   Does the work cite its (digital scholarship) precedents and data
    sources appropriately?

### Design

Although design constitutes a separate category of review, we ask
reviewers to understand design in terms of its relationship to the
purported intellectual contribution of a given project. For *sx
archipelagos*, design includes back-end architecture, workflow, and
front-end interface design. We ask reviewers to consider the overall
temporal and technical structure of a project and how this structure
relates to the goals of the project. A reviewer may ask questions like

-   How do effort and resources used in the project match its import?

-   How do the graphic and UX design elements of the front end
    contribute to the goals of the intellectual contribution? (When
    considering the public-facing design, reviewers should not place
    undue weight on “ease of use” or “glossy design” but rather consider
    whether the project’s features fit the intellectual mission of the
    project and the resources the project’s team had available to them.)

-   How does the back-end architecture hinder or move forward the
    contribution of the project and perhaps link it to existing digital
    scholarship projects?

### Preservation

When considering the life cycle of a digital scholarship project,
reviewers should not to consider preservation in terms of indefinite
periods of time. We encourage authors to be realistic about the
plausible rate of decay of their projects and to have plans in place to
manage the obsolescence of the technologies they use. We welcome
projects with a minimum of two years post-beta support. We encourage our
reviewers, therefore, to look for signs that the project team has
considered the project’s future. Possible questions are

-   What standards have been used and why?

-   How robust is the documentation on the project? Could the project be
    decomposed and recomposed based on this documentation?

-   How is the project managing its rate of decay?

-   Is the level of complexity of the project appropriate for its
    sociotechnical or institutional context?

-   How conscious is the project team regarding the life cycle of the
    project?

---

## Review of Articles: A Brief Note

Our reviewers are expected to maintain the highest academic standards in
the review of scholarly articles for publication in *sx archipelagos*.
Since many of our articles are media-rich—linking prose arguments
rhetorically to visuals—we ask our reviewers also to provide feedback on
the figures, images, and interactives used in articles.


