---
layout: project
section: projects
issue: 1
title: 
  "long": "Musical Passage: A Voyage to 1688 Jamaica "
  "short": "Musical Passage"
doi: "10.7916/D80K28PX"
date: May 2016
author:
- name: Laurent Dubois
  shortname: Dubois
  bio: "Laurent Dubois is Professor of Romance Studies and History and the Faculty Director of the [Forum for Scholars & Publics](https://fsp.trinity.duke.edu/) at Duke University. He is the author of six books, including Avengers of the New World: The Story of the Haitian Revolution (2004), Haiti: The Aftershocks of History (2012) and most recently [The Banjo: America’s African Instrument](http://www.hup.harvard.edu/catalog.php?isbn=9780674047846). In 2016-2017 he will be a Fellow at the National Humanities Center."
- name: David Garner
  shortname: Garner
  bio: "David K. Garner will begin as Assistant Professor of Composition and Theory at the University of South Carolina in fall 2016. He is a composer whose works often draw on other music as a point of departure, from Beethoven to bluegrass. Awards include a Charles Ives Scholarship from the American Academy of Arts & Letters, an ASCAP Young Composer Award, and first prizes in the OSSIA, Red Note, and NACUSA competitions."
- name: Mary Caton Lingold
  shortname: Lingold
  bio: "Mary Caton Lingold is a doctoral candidate in English at Duke, where she is completing a dissertation on early Afro-Atlantic literature and music. She is co-editor of the web collection [Provoke!: Digital Sound Studies](http://soundboxproject.com/), and a book by the same name and under contract at Duke UP. Her article on music in Caribbean travel narratives is forthcoming in *Early American Literature.* She also directs the [Sonic Dictionary](http://sonicdictionary.fhi.duke.edu/), a crowdsourced database of audio recordings."
image: images/issue01/musical-passage.jpg
thumb: images/issue01/musical-passage-thumb.jpg
link: "http://www.musicalpassage.org/#home"
language: en
---


## *sx archipelagos* presents *Musical Passage*


Developed by historian Laurent Dubois, PhD candidate in English Mary
Caton Lingold, and composer-scholar David Garner, *Musical Passage* uses
a digital format to explore a unique artifact of early African diasporic
music. The site is designed around two pages from eighteenth-century
British naturalist and collector Hans Sloane’s *A Voyage to the Islands*
(1707), which documents his time in Jamaica in the late 1680s. The pages
of *Voyage* that have been placed at the center of this site present
notation of songs played at a “festival.” This material is precious and
fascinating, representing the earliest notation we have of music
produced by enslaved Africans in the Caribbean or North America. The
performers whose music is represented and interpreted here were likely
survivors of the Middle Passage who may have been playing music they had
learned in their homelands. They may also have been in the process of
creating entirely new performance traditions.

The goal of the site’s authors is to encourage users to slow down and to
linger on the page and in the songs so as to learn more about the music
and its context through the experience of a series of musical
interpretations of the pieces Sloane presents. The interpretations
provided are meant to serve as so many invitations to encounter and
enter into dialogue with this remarkable fragment and thus to find a way
into a much broader and more foundational musical history of the
Caribbean and the wider Atlantic world.


## *sx archipelagos* review

> “an important contribution to the fields of Atlantic and Caribbean
history and ethnomusicology”

*Musical Passage* is a fascinating and well-conceived example of digital
scholarship that makes an important contribution to the fields of
Atlantic and Caribbean history and ethnomusicology. There is a
direct—and successful—effort here to combat the phenomenon of presumed
“loss in” and “silences of” the Afro-Atlantic archive. The site’s
authors present a compelling articulation of the importance of their
methodological approach and of, especially, the singular value of the
digital to grappling with the diversity of textual artifacts that must
be examined in the context of the Americas (and the Afro-Atlantic, more
broadly). They take seriously their role as mediators and strike a fine
balance between guiding and directing the user’s experience of the site.
In their rigorous engagement with a fragment/trace from the archive and
their fundamentally interdisciplinary approach, they offer a model for
collaboration among researchers in the humanities and social scientists,
experts from outside the academy, and university libraries.

The site design is both aesthetically pleasing and illustrative of the
project’s substantive contribution. The considered decision to use the
artifact itself as landing page and central querying point to which the
user must constantly return beautifully marries the object’s
multidimensionality, the interactivity of the site, and the
interdisciplinarity of the approach.

As the project develops further, it would be desirable that the authors
extend its value for a wide digital scholarly community by more
explicitly articulating—by documenting, in fact—critical elements of the
“back-end.” What technological stack undergirds the project (file types,
data models, platforms, etc.)? What plans have been made (institutional
relationships concretized) to assure the preservation
(support/maintenance) of the project for the future? How far into the
future do those plans remain viable? Also, given the range of expertise
and positioning of the three site authors (one full professor, one
graduate student, one scholar-musician) and of the institutional teams
with which they collaborated, we hope that the site will make explicit
the precise nature of the participants’ respective contributions.

It would also be desirable that the site authors situate the project
with respect to existing, related digital scholarship projects. How is
*Musical Passage* in dialogue (methodologically, substantively, or
otherwise) with other Afro-Atlantic digital humanities (DH) projects?
Has it made use of other DH resources in its own construction? Might the
authors consider adding a “For Further Consideration/Reading” section
that would include both digital and analog bibliographical references?


## Response from the creators of *Musical Passage*

> “seeking to combat the silences around Afro-Atlantic music”

We were delighted to receive the positive feedback articulated in the
review of our draft materials for *Musical Passage*. We are glad that
the site design—particularly the use of the page as the central hub for
the site—seems to do our intended work of both calling attention to and
seeking to combat the silences around Afro-Atlantic music, and we are
glad our role as mediators seems effective. Since we have particularly
enjoyed the extent to which this has been a richly collaborative
project, we also are pleased that it seems to offer a broader model for
this kind of scholarly engagement with a particular set of materials.

We also appreciate reviewers’ suggestions for articulating and thinking
through some questions we have not given enough attention to at this
point. The review encourages us to explicitly discuss some of these
questions with our Web designer, Marc Harkness, in order to find a way
to document the “back-end” of the site. Mary Caton Lingold will
specifically be working with Harkness to offer some discussion of this
directly on the site itself, in the “About” page, so that this becomes
not just a page describing our backgrounds and the project but also a
kind of meta-cartography of how the site has been built.

We really appreciate the idea of mentioning other sites that helped
inspire *Musical Passage*. There were a few avenues: an [early
site](https://sites.duke.edu/banjology/) that Harkness and Lingold
collaborated on helped us understand and think through how to showcase
sound, and we began by looking at two sites by Vincent Brown, especially
his [*Two Plantations*](http://www.twoplantations.com/), which helped to
inspire what we were doing in terms of visual design and intellectual
foundations. The idea of acknowledging this is a great one and is
something we will also do on the site. Finally, we appreciate the idea
of mapping out each of our roles in the process and what those
contributions were, probably in some kind of narrative style, one that
attempts to condense the process of collaboration through which *Musical
Passage* was produced. This, along with the material about the design of
the site, will make the “About” page a space through which to
illustrate, showcase, and perhaps model the kind of collaboration that
makes a (hopefully successful) digital humanities project happen.

The issue raised in the review about the long-term viability and
existence of the site is a vital one. We decided to construct the site
on an external server to give us maximum flexibility to develop, revise,
and tinker as we go. However, the review rightly emphasizes the need for
us to think about the long-term life and viability of the project. Part
of the complexity here is that we ourselves see this site as just the
beginning of what we hope will be a broadly generative process, one that
may lead to performances, which in turn will produce new audio and video
that we may need to find a way to showcase (and to archive) in turn. So
some of the questions about the long-term storage of the site may not be
something we can work out until the site transforms and reshapes over
the next years to incorporate the artistic work we hope that it may
inspire.

One option we have considered is to see if we can incorporate *Musical
Passage* in some way into the Duke University Libraries site, since our
project is built around an object in the Rubenstein Rare Book and
Manuscript Library’s collection. This would ensure some kind of
maintenance infrastructure beyond what we can provide. Whether this kind
of arrangement is possible or not, we will also seek to archive the site
with Duke University Libraries and also to create a digital object
identifier (DOI) for the project. This is something that Lingold has
previously done with a different digital project and for which the
library has a template. This process, which involves producing a variety
of files from the Web page that both archives the form of its
construction and makes videos of how it is navigated, will assure some
kind of archiving and storage of the site over the long term.

Finally, the suggestion that we incorporate citations of scholarly
material into the site is also an excellent one. Since the “About” page
is already going to incorporate a great deal of discussion about the
process of production of the site, we will likely provide citations at
the end of the presentation of the written material that will be
collected in a scrollable essay format as part of the site. We have at
times considered whether to offer a downloadable PDF version of the
entire essay as well, which might also include a full bibliography of
sources, and we welcome thoughts on whether this approach could be
valuable. We have, among ourselves, debated the question of how to make
sure the experience of the site remains one oriented toward engaging the
page of Sloane that we focus on and especially one that pays attention
to and dwells within the sonic experience we are hoping to reconstruct
and evoke. As the review suggests, this can be balanced with a variety
of interpretive and analytical moves that foreground both the historical
scholarship we are drawing on and the methodological and process
questions that have been raised in the production of the site. 
